## Contents

[What is politics?](#what-is-politics?)<br>
[Political Systems](#political-systems)<br>
[Political Ideologies](#political-ideologies)<br>
[British Politics](#british-politics)<br>
[Take Action](#take-action)<br>
[About](#about)<br>

# What Is Politics?

The idea of politics often brings to mind prominent political figures such as
the **_prime minister_**, political parties such as the **_Conservatives_** and
**_Labour_**, buildings such as the **_Houses Of Parliament_**, voting in
elections and following laws.

`Slider with images of the above`

While all these things are part of politics in the United Kingdom, just by
themselves it makes it politics seem distant and dull.

---

The core definition of politics is very simple:

Politics is about making **_decisions_**

Politics is about making **_decisions_** that are **_fair and just_**.

Politics is about making **_decisions_** that are **_fair and just_** as to how
**_resources are shared_** and **_what people should do_**

---

As you can see the above definition of politics can apply to any group of
people. People form groups to work towards common goals. This group can mean a
country and any of it's components such as cities or counties, and also groups
of countries such as the European Union (EU); it can also mean a company, a
sports club, a school and many other organised groups.

The means that politics overlaps with other fields; economics, law, business,
psychology and philosophy.

To understand the definition above, let's break down and explore what each
highlight part one means, using relatable examples to better appreciate the
underlying principles.

_Note: The words 'state', 'country' and 'nation' are often used interchangeably
in political writing. This can be confusing as some large countries also have
'states' as one of their components, for example USA and Australia. Throughout
this course, we'll be sticking to using 'country'_

## Making Decisions

How decisions are made, who gets to make them and enforce them is perhaps the
most important decision of all.

There exists a fine balance these elements and the way this balance exists has
been a source of conflict in every group for all of human history.

In very small groups, it's possible for everyone to be involved in every
decision that affects the group, but as groups get larger there emerges a
natural divide where some people make decisions on behalf of the group. These
people are said to 'in power' or the 'ruling class'

When there is majority level of agreement as to this process there is
harmony, while disagreement can lead to conflict and historically violence.

The decision making process forms the basis of how countries are organised and
run, which we call their political systems, and we'll be exploring these in the
next section.

These decisions are implemented primarily in the form of laws, also called
legislature.

A politician therefore is someone who is directly involved decision making
process as part of the governing group, the government.

There are many ways you can take part in the politics in the United Kingdom
aside from becoming a politician and we will look at this in the `take action`
section.

## Group Membership

There always exists the question of who belongs to the group, as some groups
may be more preferable for some people be in than others, due to the resources
they have and what the people can do there.

In a school a member can be thought of as anyone who studies at the school.
Some schools are open to anyone under the age of 16, while others may require
you to pass an entrance exam or pay fees.

You can be a member, or a citizen of a country, by being born there, but most
countries also have processes where others can become a citizen of their country,
and these processes come under immigration and naturalisation law.

You can also visit countries without having to become a citizen. Some countries
have more open borders than others and most have different rules for entry
depending on the person's country of origin. Some countries such as North
Korea, not only are very difficult to enter but are also very difficult for
their citizens to leave the country at all.

## What Is Fair and Just

This aspect of politics is called ethics and is part of every decision that is
made. When asking what is fair and just, we are essentially asking what actions
are good and what actions are evil and then using these principles in making
decisions. Since this is a very broad field, let's look one area in which ideas
of fairness and justice are on the forefront, criminal law.

Even things that on the surface may seem to be straightforward, such as the
morality of killing, can be highly dependent on the situation in which it
occurs. Let's look at a thought process on deciding whether killing someone is
wrong:

"Killing someone is wrong, and if someone does they must be punished and
separated from the rest of society to protect others"

"But what if their life was in danger from someone else and they killed them
was done in self defense. That must be okay"

"But what if they used unneccessary force, that is they shot someone when all
that happened was an unarmed person pushed them slightly. That doesn't seem
right"

"What if another person else walks past someone on the street who needed
medical help and did nothing, resulting in their death. Is that wrong even
thought they weren't directly involved"

Things get more complicated when determining the **_degree of 'punishment'_**
the wrong doer must receive to deter others from doing the same thing, or the
**_level of 'compensation'_** the victim gets.

## Sharing Resources

The primary resource here is often money, but this is simply because we use
money as a store and exchange of value for many different things. The money
itself can represent many other resources. A gym may have to decide
between hiring more personal trainers or buying new equipment, using the fees
they charge their members for using their facilities. They may then have to
decide which classes the personal trainers should teach, allocating the
resource of 'labour' or people; and then deciding where best to position

Countries have a national budget, money that has been collected through taxes
that they then decide how to spend. It may be spent on public services like
healthcare and public transport, while in countries whose political systems
aren't as fair and could be seen as corrupt, a large proportion may go directly
to the leaders personal accounts.

Another important resources in countries is land and the natural resources they
contain. Historically many wars have been fought over this resource. Countries
may also decide to trade their own resources with other countries, known as
imports and exports.

For example, 60% of food in Japan is imported, as it has little land area that
is suitable for farming, while it is the world's 2nd largest exporter of cars

## What People Should Do

These can be broadly divided into 'rights and freedoms' and 'duties and
responsibilities'

Rights and freedoms are those things that apply to every human and cannot be
taken away. They are based on shared values like dignity, fairness, equality,
respect and independence. No one can violate or take away someone else's basic
rights and freedoms.

While different countries may ensure different fundamental rights for their
citizens, they often include things like 'the freedom from slavery', 'the right
to a fair trial' and 'the right to education'. The UK follows the European
Convention on Human Rights, which also includes 'the abolition of the death
penalty', which for example is not present in the USA; and freedom of
expression (freedom of speech and the media), which for example many would
argue is not present in China.

The duties and responsibilities aspect can be thought of as applying and
extending these rights and freedoms, in different areas and processes. For
example contract law outlines how agreements must be made between different
parties in different situations, like hiring employees. The lack these laws
employees being made to do unsafe tasks or work extremely long hours. Meanwhile
property law ensures that your belongings which could range from land and
houses to personal items like computers and phones cannot be unfairly taken
from you.

It is easy to take the existence of these for granted, if we've grown up having
been accustomed to their presence, but it's important to remember that they
weren't always around and for many people in the world still are not there.
Also it's always possible to improve them based on what you believe is fair and
just.

---

---

# Political Systems

You may have heard of political terms like democracy, communism, dictatorships,
left wing and right wing.

These are terms used to describe the primary ways in which decisions are made
and resources are shared, but also how the primary decision makers come to be
in that community.

A lot of these terms can have similar meanings. They can overlap with each
other and they are also many variants within each one. This means that there
can be infinite combination of political systems and positions you can take.
It's made even more difficult

This can make it very confusing to understand, so let's visualise these
different political systems throught two scales or spectrums, and try to
understand the basic principles underlying them.

- The economic spectrum which shows the degree to which there is public or
  private property
- The power spectrum which shows the degree to which decisions are made by
  individuals or by a central authourity

  _ Note: Typically in media and discussion, these two spectrums are combined
  and simplified further into just left or right wing, but this can be
  misleading as people may have different stances on different issues, so it's
  always best to do your own research on that particular issue to find out what  
  politicians or the media mean when they generalise say they take a 'left
  wing' or 'right wing' viewpoint_

It's important to know that the systems on both spectrum each have their own
pros and cons, and a community can theoretically prosper with any system. Over
thousands of years however humans have to come to find that certain positions
on the spectrum, or certain political systems are much **_more likely_** to
lead to a propering and fair society.

### The power spectrum

Before looking at some of the political systems at various on the spectrum,
let's look at some examples of decisions that we can make (or the government
may make for us), and think about when reading about the political systems.

- The speed limit to drive at
- Buying different mind-altering substances
- Who to marry
- Owning weapons
- Where to get an education
- Religious beliefs

In an anarchy, any cooperation between individuals is done on a voluntary
basis. There is no central authority telling individuals what to do. This
system can be seen into exist in nature, and humans too existed in this format
during prehistoric times as tribal hunter-gatherers. Though it is very possible
for an anarchy to be harmonious, it is highly dependent on the voluntary
co-operation of individuals. It is possible for hierarchies to emerge as those
who are lucky enough to be physically stronger or have access to more natural
resources around them, exert their influence onto others. Proponents of anarchy
believe that humans are naturally cooperative and don't need a central
authority to tell them what to do, while others would argue that history has
demonstrated otherwise and that some people will gladly oppress others for
their own benefit.

Autocracies and oligarchies are fairly similar. An autocracy is rule by one
individual, while an oligarchy is rule by a few inviduals. These systems can be
further divided based on how these individuals came to power:

- Monarchy - The classic kings and queens, where power is passed onto family
  members. The United Kingdom is what is known as a constitutional monarchy,
  where the leaders are elected and the royal family has little real power.

- Plutocracy - A society that is ruled by the wealthiest individuals. Some
  would argue that some modern democracies are plutocracies in disguise, as it
  is only the extremely wealthy who have the means and opportunities to go into
  politics as a career, and they in turn create policies that serve the wealth.  
  As an example, in the U.K as of 2019, 29% of Members of Parliament went to
  private school, compared to 7% of the general population.

- Aristocracy - This literally means 'rule by the best'. Though a vague
  definition in itself, that could also apply to democracies, it
  generally means a _self-appointing_ group of people who deem themselves to be
  the best rulers. In Ancient Greece it was contrasted favourably with
  monarchy, and they believed, that if it was corrupted, it would be easier to
  correct than a corrupt democracy which could descend into mob rule.

A dictatorship can be thought of as an autocracy or oligarchy, but with the
emphasis that they have complete control over how the country is run. A
dictatorship can manifest through the above systems, but it can also arise as
the below systems.

- Military dictatorship
- Single party dictatorship
- Personalist dictatorship

### The economic spectrum

The economic system of a country is fairly dependent on the systems of power,
and it also more fluid. Therefore in the diagram below there won't be any
specific

---

---

# Political Ideologies

Political Ideologies can be general views on how society should be organised,
patterns of behaviour that countries exhibit or they can be more specific
stances on issues.

Liberalism

Feminism

Socialism

Capitalism

Communism

Fascism

Imperialism

---

---

# British Politics

common law

---

---

# Take Action

---

---

# About
